docs/src/main/sphinx/security/built-in-system-access-control.rst, before:

=====================
System access control
=====================

A system access control enforces authorization at a global level,
before any connector level authorization. You can use one of the built-in
implementations in Trino, or provide your own by following the guidelines in
:doc:`/develop/system-access-control`.

Multiple system access control implementations may be configured at once
using the ``access-control.config-files`` configuration property. It should
contain a comma separated list of the access control property files to use
(rather than the default ``etc/access-control.properties``).

Trino offers the following built-in implementations:

================================================== =================================================================
System access control name                         Description
================================================== =================================================================
``default``                                        All operations are permitted, except for user impersonation and
                                                   triggering :doc:`/admin/graceful-shutdown`.

                                                   This is the default access control if none are configured.

``allow-all``                                      All operations are permitted.

``read-only``                                      Operations that read data or metadata are permitted, but
                                                   none of the operations that write data or metadata are allowed.

``file``                                           Authorization rules are specified in a config file.
                                                   See :doc:`file-system-access-control`.
================================================== =================================================================

If you want to limit access on a system level in any other way than the ones
listed above, you must implement a custom :doc:`/develop/system-access-control`.

Access control must be configured on the coordinator. However authorization for
certain operations, such a triggering :doc:`/admin/graceful-shutdown`, are
performed on specific worker nodes. In such cases access control must also be
configured on all workers.

Read only system access control
===============================

This access control allows any operation that reads data or
metadata, such as ``SELECT`` or ``SHOW``. Setting system level or catalog level
session properties is also permitted. However, any operation that writes data or
metadata, such as ``CREATE``, ``INSERT`` or ``DELETE``, is prohibited.
To use this access control, add an ``etc/access-control.properties``
file with the following contents:

.. code-block:: text

   access-control.name=read-only

Commit message:

Improve rendering of table
- better column width adjustment
- easier source formatting as side benefit

docs/src/main/sphinx/security/built-in-system-access-control.rst, after:

=====================
System access control
=====================

A system access control enforces authorization at a global level,
before any connector level authorization. You can use one of the built-in
implementations in Trino, or provide your own by following the guidelines in
:doc:`/develop/system-access-control`.

To use a system access control, add an ``etc/access-control.properties`` file
with the following content and the desired system access control name on all
cluster nodes:

.. code-block:: text

   access-control.name=allow-all

Multiple system access control implementations may be configured at once
using the ``access-control.config-files`` configuration property. It should
contain a comma separated list of the access control property files to use
(rather than the default ``etc/access-control.properties``).

Trino offers the following built-in system access control implementations:

.. list-table::
  :widths: 20, 80
  :header-rows: 1

  * - Name
    - Description
  * - ``default``
    - All operations are permitted, except for user impersonation and triggering
      :doc:`/admin/graceful-shutdown`.

      This is the default access control if none are configured.
  * - ``allow-all``
    - All operations are permitted.
  * - ``read-only``
    - Operations that read data or metadata are permitted, but none of the
      operations that write data or metadata are allowed.
  * - ``file``
    - Authorization rules are specified in a config file. See
      :doc:`file-system-access-control`.

If you want to limit access on a system level in any other way than the ones
listed above, you must implement a custom :doc:`/develop/system-access-control`.

Access control must be configured on the coordinator. Authorization for
operations on specific worker nodes, such a triggering
:doc:`/admin/graceful-shutdown`, must also be configured on all workers.

Read only system access control
===============================

This access control allows any operation that reads data or
metadata, such as ``SELECT`` or ``SHOW``. Setting system level or catalog level
session properties is also permitted. However, any operation that writes data or
metadata, such as ``CREATE``, ``INSERT`` or ``DELETE``, is prohibited.
To use this access control, add an ``etc/access-control.properties``
file with the following contents:

.. code-block:: text

   access-control.name=read-only
